ABSTRACT
The word "vote" means to choose from a list, to elect or to determine. The main goal of voting
(in a scenario involving the citizens of a given country) is to come
up with leaders of the people's choice.
Most countries, India not an exception, have problems when it comes to voting. Some of the
problems involved include ridging votes during election, insecure or inaccessible polling
stations, inadequate polling materials and also inexperienced personnel.
This online voting/polling system seeks to address the above issues. It should be noted that with
this system in place, the users, citizens in this case shall be given ample time during the voting
period. They shall also be trained on how to vote online before the election time.
INTRODUCTION TO ONLINE VOTING SYSTEM:
"ONLINE VOTING SYSTEM" is an online voting technique. In this system people who have
citizenship of India and whose age is above 18 years of age and any sex can give his her vote
online without going to any physical polling station.
There is a database which is maintained in which all the names of voters with complete
information is stored.
In "ONLINE VOTING SYSTEM" a voter can use his or her voting right online without any
difficulty. He\She has to be registered first for him/her to vote. Registration is mainly done by the
system administrator for security reasons. The system Administrator registers the voters on a
special site of the system visited by him only by simply filling a registration form to register
voters. Citizens seeking registration are expected to contact the system administrator to submit
their details. After the validity of them being citizens of India has been confirmed by the system
administrator by comparing their details submitted with those in existing databases such as
those as the Registrar of Persons, the citizen is then registered as a voter.
After registration, the voter is assigned a secret Voter ID with which he/she can use to log into
the system and enjoy services provided by the system such as voting. If invalid/wrong details
are submitted, then the citizen is not registered to vote.
BACKGROUND OF STUDY
The Online voting system (OVS) also known as e-voting is a term encompassing several
different types of voting embracing both electronic means of counting votes. Electronic voting
technology can include punched cards, optical scan voting systems and specialized voting
kiosks (including self contained direct recording electronic voting systems or DRE). It can also
involve transmission of ballots and votes via telephones, private computer networks, or the
internet.
Online voting is an electronic way of choosing leaders via a web driven application. The
advantage of online voting over the common "queue method" is that the voters have the choice
of voting at their own free time and there is reduced congestion. It also minimizes errors of vote
counting. The individual votes are submitted in a database which can be queried to find out who
of the aspirants for a given post has the highest number of votes.
This system is geared towards increasing the voting percentage in India since it has been
noted that with the old voting method (the Queue System), the voter turnout has been a wanting
case. With the system in place also, if high security is applied, cases of false votes shall be
reduced.
With the "ONLINE VOTING SYSTEM", a voter can use his or her voting right online without any
difficulty. He\She has to register as a voter first before being authorized to vote. The registration
should be done prior to the voting date to enable data update in the database.
However, not just anybody can vote. For one to participate in the elections, he/she must have
the requirements. For instance, he/she must be a registered citizen i.e. must be 18 and above
years old. As already stated, the project 'Online Voting provides means for fast and convenient
voting and access to this system is limited only to registered voters.
Internet voting systems are appealing for several reasons which include; People are getting
more used to work with computers to do all sorts of things, namely sensitive operations such as
shopping and home banking and they allow people to vote far from where they usually live,
helping to reduce absenteeism rate.
SIGNIFICANCE OF STUDY:
The main purposes of OVS include:
● Provision of improved voting services to the voters through fast, timely and convenient
voting.
● Reduction of the costs incurred by the Indian Electoral Commission during voting time
in paying the very many clerks employed for the sake of the success of the manual
system.
● Check to ensure that the members who are registered are the only ones to vote. Cases
of "Dead People" voting are also minimized.
● Online voting system (OVS) will require being very precise or cost cutting to produce an
effective election management system.
● Therefore crucial points that this (OVS) emphasizes on are listed below.
1. Require less number of staff during the election. This system is a lot easier to
independently moderate the elections and subsequently reinforce its transparency and
fairness.
2.Less capital, less effort, and less labor intensive, as the primary cost and effort will focus
primarily on creating, managing, and running a secure online portal.
3.Increased number of voters as individuals will find it easier and more convenient to vote,
especially those abroad.
Objectives Of The PROJECT:
The specific objectives of the project include:
● Reviewing the existing/current voting process or approach in India;
● Coming up with an automated voting system in India;
● implementing a an automated/online voting system;
● Validating the system to ensure that only eligible voters are allowed to vote.
Project justification:
The ONLINE VOTING SYSTEM-INDIA shall reduce the time spent making long queues at the
polling stations during voting. It shall also enable the voters to vote from any part of the globe as
explained since this is an online application available on the internet. Cases of vote miscounts
shall also be solved since at the backend of this system resides a well developed database
using MYSQL that can provide the correct data once it's correctly queried. Since the voting
process shall be open as early as possible, the voters shall have ample time to decide when
and whom to vote for.
SCOPE OF STUDY:
It is focused on studying the existing system of voting in India and to make sure that the
people's vote is counted, for fairness in the elective positions. This is also will produce:
• Less effort and less labor intensive, as the primary cost and focus primary on creating,
managing, and running a secure web voting portal.
• Increasing number of voters as individuals will find it easier and more
convenient to vote, especially those abroad.
Requirements:
1) Registration of the voter is done by ELECTION COMMISION OF INDIA.
2) ELECTION COMMISION OF INDIA can change the information any time
if required.
3) Registration of the Voter depends upon the information filled by the
user.
4) Voter is given a unique ID and PASSWORD.
5) In the DATABASE information of every voter is stored.
6) Database shows the information to every user.
Problems with the Existing Voter Registration System
The problems of the existing manual system of voting include among others the
following:
1. Expensive and Time consuming: The process of collecting data and entering this data into the
database takes too much time and is expensive to conduct, for example, time and money is
spent in printing data capture forms, in preparing registration stations together with human
resources, and there after advertising the days set for registration process including sensitizing
voters on the need for registration, as well as time spent on entering this data to the database.
2. Too much paperwork: The process involves too much paperwork and paper storage which is
difficult as papers become bulky with the population size.
3. Errors during data entry: Errors are part of all human beings; it is very unlikely for humans to
be 100 percent efficient in data entry.
CONCLUSION:
This Online Voting system will manage the Voter's information by which a voter can login and
use his voting rights. The system will incorporate all features of the Voting system. It provides
the tools for maintaining voter's vote to every party and it counts the total no. of votes of every
party. There is a DATABASE which is maintained by the ELECTION COMMISION OF INDIA in
which all the names of voters with complete information is stored.
In this user who is above 18 year's register his/her information on the database and when
he/she wants to vote he/she has to login by his id and password and can vote to any party only
a single time. Voting detail is stored in the database and the result is displayed by calculation.
By online voting system the percentage of voting is increased. It decreases the cost and time of
the voting process. It is very easy to use and it is very less time consuming. It is very easy to
debug
